.. _2022.1.1:

**************************
Release Notes 2022.1.1
**************************
The 2022.1.1 release notes were released on 7/19/2022 and describe the following:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1      

Version Content
----------
The 2022.1.1 Release Notes describes the following: 

* Enhanced security features
* `SQream Acceleration Studio 5.4.7 <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2022.1.1/sqream_studio_5.4.7/index.html>`_

New Features
----------
The 2022.1.1 Release Notes include the following new features:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1
   
Password Security Compliance
************
In compliance with GDPR standards, SQream now requires a strong password policy when accessing the CLI or Studio.

For more information, see `Password Policy <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2022.1.1/operational_guides/access_control_password_policy.html>`_.

Known Issues
---------
There were no known issues in Version 2022.1.1.

Resolved Issues
---------
The following table lists the issues that were resolved in Version 2022.1.1:

+-------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **SQ No.**  | **Description**                                                                                |
+=============+================================================================================================+
| SQ-6419     | An internal compiler error occurred when casting Numeric literals in an aggregation function.  |
+-------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-10873    | Inserting 100K bytes into a text column resulted in an unclear error message.                  |
+-------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-10955    | Unneeded reads were occurring when filtering by date.                                          |
+-------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Operations and Configuration Changes
--------
The ``login_max_retries`` configuration flag is required for adjusting the permitted log-in attempts.

For more information, see `Adjusting the Permitted Log-In Attempts <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2022.1.1/configuration_guides/login_max_retries.html>`_.

Naming Changes
-------
No relevant naming changes were made.

Deprecated Features
-------
In :ref:`sqream_studio_5.4.7`, the **Configuration** section has been temporarily disabled and will be enabled at a later date. In addition, the **Log Lines** tab in the **Log** section has been removed.

End of Support
-------
The End of Support section is not relevant to Version 2022.1.1.

Upgrading to v2022.1.1
-------
1. Generate a back-up of the metadata by running the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ select backup_metadata('out_path');
	  
   .. tip:: SQream recommends storing the generated back-up locally in case needed.
   
   SQream runs the Garbage Collector and creates a clean backup tarball package.
   
2. Shut down all SQream services.

    ::

3. Extract the recently created back-up file.

    ::

4. Replace your current metadata with the metadata you stored in the back-up file.

    ::

5. Navigate to the new SQream package bin folder.

    ::

6. Run the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ ./upgrade_storage <levelDB path>

  .. note:: Upgrading from a major version to another major version requires you to follow the **Upgrade Storage** step. This is described in Step 7 of the `Upgrading SQream Version <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2022.1.1/installation_guides/installing_sqream_with_binary.html#upgrading-sqream-version>`_ procedure.
  
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :glob:
   :hidden:

   2022.1.1