.. _2019.2.1:

******************************
What's new in 2019.2.1
******************************

* 250 bugs fixed. Thanks to all of our customers and an unprecedented number of deployments for helping us find and fix these!
* Improved Unicode text handling on the GPU
* Improved logging and monitoring of statements
* Alibaba DataX connector


Improvements
=====================

* We’ve updated the ``show_server_status()`` function to more accurately reflect the status of statements across the cluster:

   * Preparing – Initial validation
   * In queue – Waiting for execution
   * Initializing – Pre-execution processing
   * Executing – statement is running

* We’ve improved our log files and have unified them into a single file per instance, per date. Each message type has a unique code which can help identify potential issues. See the documentation for full details on the changes to the log structures.

* ``WITH ADMIN OPTION`` added in ``GRANT``/``REVOKE`` operations, allowing roles to grant their own permissions to others.

* HA cluster fully supports qualified hostnames, and no longer requires explicit IP addresses.

* SQream DB CLI’s history can be disabled, by passing ``./ClientCmd --no-history``


Behaviour changes
=====================

* SQream DB no longer applies an implicit cast from a long text column to a shorter text column (``VARCHAR``/``NVARCHAR``). This means some ``INSERT``/``COPY`` operations will now error instead of truncating the text. This is intended to prevent accidental truncation of text columns. If you want the old truncation behaviour, you can use the ``SUBSTRING`` function to truncate the text.


Operations
=====================

* The client-server protocol has been updated to support a wider range of encodings. End users are required to use only the latest ClientCmd, JDBC, and ODBC drivers delivered with this version.

* Clients such as SecureCRT and other shells must have locale set as ``cp874`` or equivalent

* When upgrading from SQream DB v3.2 or lower, you must upgrade the storage version by using the storage upgrade utility: ``./bin/upgrade_storage /path/to/storage/sqreamdb/``


Known Issues & Limitations
===================================

* NVARCHAR columns cannot be used as a ``GROUP BY`` key when there are multiple ``COUNT (DISTINCT …)`` operations in a query

* NVARCHAR columns cannot be used in a statement containing window functions

* NVARCHAR is not supported as a join key

* The following functions are not supported on ``NVARCHAR`` column types: ``chr``, ``min``, ``max``, ``patindex``, ``to_binary``, ``to_hex``, ``rlike``, ``regexp_count``, ``regexp_instr``, ``regexp_substr``

* SQream DB dashboard: Only works with a HA clustered installation

* SQream DB editor: External tables and UDFs don’t appear in the DB Tree but do appear in the relevant sqream_catalog entries.


Fixes
=====================

250 bugs and issues fixed, including:

* Variety of performance improvements:

* Improved performance of ``NVARCHAR`` by up to 315% for a variety of scenarios, including ``COPY FROM``, ``INNER JOIN``, ``LEFT JOIN``.

* Improved load performance from previous versions

* Faster compilation times for very complex queries

* DWLM:

   * Fixed situation where queries were not distributed correctly among all available instances
   * Fixed ``cannot execute - reconnectDb error`` error
   * Fixed occasional hanging statement
   * Fixed occasional ``Connection refused``

* Window functions:

   * Fixed window function edge-case ``error WindowA with no functions``
   * Fixed situations where the SUM window function is applied on a column, partitioned by a second, and sorted by a third would return wrong results when scanning very large datasets

* Other bugs:

   * Fixed situation where many concurrent statements running would result in ``map::at`` appearing
   * Fixed situation where SQream DB would restart when force-stopping an ``INSERT`` over the network
   * Fixed situation where RAM wasn’t released immediately after statement has been executed
   * Fixed Type doesn’t have a fixed size error that appeared when using an external table joined with a standard SQream DB table
