.. _2020.3.1:

**************************
2020.3.1 Release Notes
**************************
The 2020.3.1 release notes were released on October 8, 2020 and describes the following:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1



New Features
-------------
The following list describes the new features:


* TEXT data type:
   * Full support for ``MIN`` and ``MAX`` aggregate functions on ``TEXT`` columns in ``GROUP BY`` queries.
   * Support Text-type as window partition keys (e.g., select distinct name, max(id) over (partition by name) from ``textTable;``).
   * Support Text-type fields in windows order by keys.
   * Support join on ``TEXT`` columns (such as ``t1.x = t2.y`` where ``x`` and ``y`` are columns of type ``TEXT``).
   * Complete the implementation of ``LIKE`` on ``TEXT`` columns (previously limited to prefix and suffix).
   * Support for cast fromm ``TEXT`` to ``REAL/FLOAT``.
   * New string function - ``REPEAT`` for repeating a string value for a specified number of times.
   
* Support mapping ``DECIMAL ORC`` columns to SQream's floating-point types.
   
* Support ``LIKE`` on non-literal patterns (such as columns and complex expressions).

* Catch OS signals and save the signal along with the stack trace in the SQream debug log.

* Support equijoin conditions on columns with different types (such as ``tinyint``, ``smallint``, ``int`` and ``bigint``).

* ``DUMP_DATABASE_DDL`` now includes foreign tables in the  output.

* New utility function - ``TRUNCATE_IF_EXISTS``.


Performance Enhancements
-------------
The following list describes the performance enhancements:


* Introduced the "MetaData on Demand" feature which results in signicant proformance improvements.

* Implemented regex functions (``RLIKE``, ``REGEXP_COUNT``, ``REGEXP_INSTR``, ``REGEXP_SUBSTR``, ``PATINDEX``) for ``TEXT`` columns on GPU.


Resolved Issues
-------------
The following list describes the resolved issues:


* Multiple distinct aggregates no longer need to be used with developerMode flag.
* In some scenarios, the ``statement_id`` and ``connection_id values`` are incorrectly recorded as ``-1`` in the log.
* ``NOT RLIKE`` is not supported for ``TEXT`` in the compiler.
* Casting from ``TEXT`` to ``date/datetime`` returns an error when the ``TEXT`` column contains ``NULL``.


Known Issues and Limitations
-------------
No known issues and limitations.


Upgrading to v2020.3.1
----------------

Versions are available for IBM POWER9, RedHat (CentOS) 7, Ubuntu 18.04, and other OSs via Docker.

Contact your account manager to get the latest release of SQream DB.