.. _2021.2:

**************************
Release Notes 2021.2
**************************
The 2021.2 release notes were released on 13/9/2021.

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1
   
New Features
----------
The 2021.2 Release Notes include the following new features:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1
   
New Driver Compatibility
************
The 2021.2 release supports the following drivers:

* **JDBC** - new driver version (JDBC 4.5) with important bug fixes.
* **ODBC** - ODBC 4.1.1. available on request.
* **NodeJS** - all versions starting with NodeJS 4.0. SQream recommends the latest version (NodeJS 4.2.4). 
* **Dot Net** - SQream recommends version version 3.02 (compatible with DotNet version 48). 
* **Pysqream** - pysqream 3.1.2

Centralized Configuration System
************
SQream now uses a new configuration system based on centralized configuration accessible from SQream Studio.

For more information, see the following:

* `Configuration <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2021.2/guides/operations/configuration.html>`_ - describes how to configure your instance of SQream from a centralized location.
* `SQream Studio 5.4.2 <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2021.2/guides/operations/sqream_studio_5.4.2.html#>`_ - configure your instance of SQream from Studio.
   
Qualifying Schemas Without Providing an Alias
************
When running queries, SQream now supports qualifying schemas without providing an alias.

For more information, see :ref:`create_schema`.





Double-Quotations Supported When Importing and Exporting CSVs
************
When importing and exporting CSVs, SQream now supports using quotation characters other than double quotation marks (``"``).

For more information, see the following:

* :ref:`copy_from`

* :ref:`copy_to`


Note the following:

* Leaving *<x>* unspecified uses the default value of standard double quotations ``”``.

   ::

* The quotation character must be a single, 1-byte printable ASCII character. The same octal syntax of the copy command can be used.

   ::

* The quote character cannot be contained in the field delimiter, record delimiter, or null marker.

   ::
   
* Double-quotations can be customized when the ``csv_fdw`` value is used with the ``COPY FROM`` and ``CREATE FOREIGN TABLE`` statements.

   ::

* The default escape character always matches the quote character, and can be overridden by using the ``ESCAPE = {'\\' | E'\XXX')`` syntax as shown in the following examples:

  .. code-block:: postgres

     copy t from wrapper csv_fdw options (location = '/tmp/file.csv', escape='\\');

  .. code-block:: postgres

     copy t from wrapper csv_fdw options (location = '/tmp/file.csv', escape=E'\017');

  .. code-block:: postgres

     copy t to wrapper csv_fdw options (location = '/tmp/file.csv', escape='\\');
	 
For more information, see the following statements:


* :ref:`copy_from`

* :ref:`create_foreign_table`

Performance Enhancements
------
In Version 2021.2, an advanced smart spooling mechanism splits spool memory based on required CP usage.

Resolved Issues
------
The following table lists the issues that were resolved in Version 2021.2:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 17 200
   :header-rows: 1  
   
   * - SQ No.
     - Description
   * - SQ-8294
     - Quote qualifiers were not present in exported file, preventing it from being reloaded.   
   * - SQ-8288
     - Saved ``TEXT`` query parameters were not supported.        
   * - SQ-8266
     - A data loading issue occurred related to column order.      

	 
Known Issues
------
The **Known Issues** section is not relevant to Version 2021.2.


Naming Convention Modifications
------
The **Naming Convention Modifications** describes SQream features, such as data types or statements, that have been renamed.

NVARCHAR Data Type Renamed TEXT
************
The ``NVARCHAR`` data type has been renamed ``TEXT``.


For more information on the ``TEXT`` data type, see `String (TEXT) <https://docs.sqream.com/en/latest/reference/sql_data_types.html#string-text-varchar>`_

End of Support
------
The **End of Support** section is not relevant to Version 2021.2.

Deprecated Features
------
The **Deprecated Components** section is not relevant to Version 2021.2.

Upgrading Your SQream Version
------
The **Upgrading Your SQream Version** section describes the following:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1
   
Upgrading Your Storage Version
************
When upgrading from a SQream version earlier than 2021.2 you must upgrade your storage version, as shown in the following example:

   .. code-block:: console  

      $ cat /etc/sqream/sqream1_config.json |grep cluster
      $ ./upgrade_storage <cluster path>
	  
For more information on upgrading your SQream version, see `Upgrading SQream Version <https://docs.sqream.com/en/latest/guides/operations/installing_sqream_with_binary.html#upgrading-sqream-version>`_.

Upgrading Your Client Drivers
************
For more information on the client drivers for version 2021.2, see `Client Drivers for 2021.2 <https://docs.sqream.com/en/latest/guides/client_drivers/index.html>`_.

Configuring Your Instance of SQream
************
A new configuration method is used starting with Version 2021.2.

For more information about configuring your instance of SQream, see :ref:`configuration`.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :glob:
   :hidden:

   2021.2