.. _2022.1.2:

**************************
Release Notes 2022.1.2
**************************
The 2022.1.2 release notes were released on 8/24/2022 and describe the following:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1      

Version Content
----------
The 2022.1.2 Release Notes describes the following: 

* Automatic schema identification.

   ::

* Optimized queries on external Parquet tables.

New Features
----------
The 2022.1.2 Release Notes include the following new features:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1
   
Parquet Read Optimization
************
Querying Parquet foreign tables has been optimized and is now up to 20x faster than in previous versions.

Resolved Issues
---------
The following table lists the issues that were resolved in Version 2022.1.2:

+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **SQ No.**  | **Description**                                                                                                                           |
+=============+===========================================================================================================================================+
| SQ-10892    | An incorrect error message was displayed when users ran the ``UPDATE`` command on foreign tables.                                         |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-11273    | Clustering optimization only occurs when copying data from CSV files.                                                                     |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Operations and Configuration Changes
--------
No configuration changes were made.

Naming Changes
-------
No relevant naming changes were made.

Deprecated Features
-------
No features were deprecated for Version 2022.1.2.

End of Support
-------
The End of Support section is not relevant to Version 2022.1.2.

Upgrading to v2022.1.2
-------
1. Generate a back-up of the metadata by running the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ select backup_metadata('out_path');
	  
   .. tip:: SQream recommends storing the generated back-up locally in case needed.
   
   SQream runs the Garbage Collector and creates a clean backup tarball package.
   
2. Shut down all SQream services.

    ::

3. Extract the recently created back-up file.

    ::

4. Replace your current metadata with the metadata you stored in the back-up file.

    ::

5. Navigate to the new SQream package bin folder.

    ::

6. Run the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ ./upgrade_storage <levelDB path>

  .. note:: Upgrading from a major version to another major version requires you to follow the **Upgrade Storage** step. This is described in Step 7 of the `Upgrading SQream Version <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2022.1.2/installation_guides/installing_sqream_with_binary.html#upgrading-sqream-version>`_ procedure.
  
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :glob:
   :hidden:

   2022.1.2