.. _2022.1:

**************************
Release Notes 2022.1
**************************
The 2022.1 release notes were released on 7/19/2022 and describe the following:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1      

Version Content
----------
The 2022.1 Release Notes describes the following:

* Enhanced security features.
* New data manipulation command.
* Additional data ingestion format.

New Features
----------
The 2022.1 Release Notes include the following new features:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1
   
Data Encryption
************
SQream now supports data encryption mechanisms in accordance with **General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)** standards.

Using the data encryption feature may lead to a maximum of a 10% increase in performance degradation.

For more information, see `Data Encryption <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2021.2.1/feature_guides/data_encryption.html>`_.

Update Feature
************
SQream now supports the DML **Update** feature, which is used for modifying the value of certain columns in existing rows.

For more information, see `UPDATE <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2021.2.1/reference/sql/sql_statements/dml_commands/update.html#update>`_.

Avro Ingestion
************
SQream now supports ingesting data from Avro files.

For more information, see `Inserting Data from Avro <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2021.2.1/data_ingestion/avro.html>`_.

Known Issues
---------
The following table lists the known issues for Version 2022.1:

+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **SQ No.**  | **Description**                                                                           |
+=============+===========================================================================================+
| SQ-7732     | Reading numeric columns from an external Parquet file generated an error.                 |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-9889     | Running a query including Thai characters generated an internal runtime error.            |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-10071    | Error on existing subqueries with TEXT and VARCHAR equality condition                     |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-10191    | The ``ALTER DEFAULT SCHEMA`` command was not functioning correctly.                       |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-10629    | Inserting data into a table significantly slowed down running queries.                    |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-10659    | Using a comment generated a compile error.                                                |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Resolved Issues
---------
The following table lists the issues that were resolved in Version 2022.1:

+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **SQ No.**  | **Description**                                                                           |
+=============+===========================================================================================+
| SQ-10111    | Reading numeric columns from an external Parquet file generated an error.                 |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Operations and Configuration Changes
--------
No relevant operations and configuration changes were made.

Naming Changes
-------
No relevant naming changes were made.

Deprecated Features
-------
In SQream version 2022.1 the ``VARCHAR`` data type has been deprecated and replaced with ``TEXT``. SQream will maintain ``VARCHAR`` in all previous versions until completing the migration to ``TEXT``, at which point it will be deprecated in all earlier versions. SQream also provides an automated and secure tool to facilitate and simplify migration from ``VARCHAR`` to ``TEXT``.  

If you are using an earlier version of SQream, see the `Using Legacy String Literals <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2021.2.1/configuration_guides/use_legacy_string_literals.html>`_ configuration flag.

End of Support
-------
The End of Support section is not relevant to Version 2022.1.

Upgrading to v2022.1
-------
1. Generate a back-up of the metadata by running the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ select backup_metadata('out_path');
	  
   .. tip:: SQream recommends storing the generated back-up locally in case needed.
   
   SQream runs the Garbage Collector and creates a clean backup tarball package.
   
2. Shut down all SQream services.

    ::

3. Extract the recently created back-up file.

    ::

4. Replace your current metadata with the metadata you stored in the back-up file.

    ::

5. Navigate to the new SQream package bin folder.

    ::

6. Run the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ ./upgrade_storage <levelDB path>

  .. note:: Upgrading from a major version to another major version requires you to follow the **Upgrade Storage** step. This is described in Step 7 of the `Upgrading SQream Version <https://docs.sqream.com/en/v2021.2.1/installation_guides/installing_sqream_with_binary.html#upgrading-sqream-version>`_ procedure.
  
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :glob:
   :hidden:

   2022.1
