.. _4.1:

**************************
Release Notes 4.1
**************************

SQream is introducing a new version release system that follows the more commonly used Major.Minor.Patch versioning schema. The newly released **4.0 version** is a minor version upgrade and does not require considerable preparation.

The 4.1 release notes were released on 03/01/2023 and describe the following:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1      

New Features
------------

 * :ref:`Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)<ldap>` management enhancement
 
	::

 * The :ref:`Trino<trino>` ETL tool may now be used for distributed SQL query processing
 
 	::
	
 * A new brute-force attack protection mechanism locks out user accounts for 15 minutes following 5 consecutive failed login attempts
 
SQream Studio Updates and Improvements
--------------------------------------

No Studio updates

	::

Known Issues
------------

:ref:`Percentile<percentile_disc>` is not supported for Window functions.


Version 4.1 resolved Issues
-----------------------------

+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  **SQ No.**            | **Description**                                                                          |
+========================+==========================================================================================+
| SQ-11287               | Function definition SQL UDF parenthesis issue                                            |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-11296               | Slow catalog queries                                                                     |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-12255               | Text column additional characters when using ``COPY TO`` statement                       |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-12510               | Encryption memory issues                                                                 |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-13219               | JDBC ``supportsSchemasInDataManipulation()`` method issue                                |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Configuration Changes
---------------------

No configuration changes


Naming Changes
--------------
No naming changes


Deprecated Features
-------------------

► Square Brackets ``[]``

The ``[]``, which are frequently used to delimit :ref:`identifiers<keywords_and_identifiers>` such as column names, table names, and other database objects, will soon be deprecated to facilitate the use of the ``ARRAY`` data type.

* Support in ``[]`` for delimiting database object identifiers ends at 06/01/2023.

* To delimit database object identifiers, you will be able to use double quotes ``""``.


► ``VARCHAR``

The ``VARCHAR`` data type is deprecated to improve the core functionalities of the platform and to align with the constantly evolving ecosystem requirements.

* Support in the ``VARCHAR`` data type ends at September 30th, 2023.

* ``VARCHAR`` is no longer supported for new customers, effective from Version 2022.1.3.  

* The ``TEXT`` data type is replacing the ``VARCHAR`` and ``NVARCHAR`` data types.




End of Support
---------------
No End of Support changes were made.

Upgrading to v4.1
-------------------
1. Generate a back-up of the metadata by running the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ select backup_metadata('out_path');
	  
   .. tip:: SQream recommends storing the generated back-up locally in case needed.
   
   SQream runs the Garbage Collector and creates a clean backup tarball package.
   
2. Shut down all SQream services.

    ::

3. Extract the recently created back-up file.

    ::

4. Replace your current metadata with the metadata you stored in the back-up file.

    ::

5. Navigate to the new SQream package bin folder.

    ::

6. Run the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ ./upgrade_storage <levelDB path>

  .. note:: Upgrading from a major version to another major version requires you to follow the **Upgrade Storage** step. This is described in Step 7 of the `Upgrading SQream Version <../installation_guides/installing_sqream_with_binary.html#upgrading-sqream-version>`_ procedure.
  
