.. _4.2:

**************************
Release Notes 4.2
**************************

SQream is introducing a new version release system that follows the more commonly used Major.Minor.Patch versioning schema. The newly released **4.0 version** is a minor version upgrade and does not require considerable preparation.

The 4.2 release notes were released on 04/23/2023 and describe the following:

.. contents:: 
   :local:
   :depth: 1      

New Features
------------


:ref:`Apache Spark<spark>` may now be used for large-scale data processing.
 
 	::

:ref:`Physical deletion<delete_guide>` performance enhancement by supporting file systems with parallelism capabilities
 
 
Newly Released Connector Drivers
--------------------------------

► Pysqream 3.2.5
 * Supports Python version 3.9 and newer
 * `.tar file <https://github.com/SQream/pysqream/releases/tag/v3.2.5>`_
 * :ref:`Documentation<pysqream>`

► ODBC 4.4.4
 * :ref:`Getting the ODBC Driver<odbc>`

► JDBC 4.5.8
 * `.jar file <https://sq-ftp-public.s3.amazonaws.com/sqream-jdbc-4.5.8.jar>`_
 * :ref:`Documentation<java_jdbc>`
 
► Spark 5.0.0
 * `.jar file <https://sq-ftp-public.s3.amazonaws.com/Spark-Sqream-Connector-5.0.0.jar>`_
 * :ref:`Documentation<spark>`
 
Storage Version
---------------

The storage version presently in effect is version 46.
 
SQream Studio Updates and Improvements
--------------------------------------

SQream Studio v5.5.4 has been released. 

	::

Known Issues
------------

* :ref:`Percentile<percentile_disc>` is not supported for :ref:`Window Functions<window_functions>`.

* Performance degradation when using ``VARCHAR`` partition key in a :ref:`Window Functions<window_functions>` expression



Version 4.2 resolved Issues
-----------------------------

+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  **SQ No.**            | **Description**                                                                          |
+========================+==========================================================================================+
| SQ-12598               | Foreign table ``SELECT`` statement issue                                                 |                                                                                          
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-13018               | `cleanup_extent` operation buffer issue                                                  |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-13055               | Pysqream ``NULL`` value issue                                                            |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-13322               | Clean up process is case sensitive                                                       |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SQ-13450               | Storage upgrade issue                                                                    |
+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Configuration Changes
---------------------

No configuration changes


Naming Changes
--------------
No naming changes


Deprecated Features
-------------------

► ``INT96``

Due to Parquet's lack of support of the ``INT96`` data type, SQream has decided to deprecate this data type.


► Square Brackets ``[]``

The ``[]``, which are frequently used to delimit :ref:`identifiers<keywords_and_identifiers>` such as column names, table names, and other database objects, will soon be deprecated to facilitate the use of the ``ARRAY`` data type.

* Support in ``[]`` for delimiting database object identifiers ends on June 1st, 2023.
* To delimit database object identifiers, you will be able to use double quotes ``""``.


► ``VARCHAR``

The ``VARCHAR`` data type is deprecated to improve the core functionalities of the platform and to align with the constantly evolving ecosystem requirements.

* Support in the ``VARCHAR`` data type ends at September 30th, 2023.
* ``VARCHAR`` is no longer supported for new customers, effective from Version 2022.1.3.  
* The ``TEXT`` data type is replacing the ``VARCHAR`` and ``NVARCHAR`` data types.


End of Support
---------------
No End of Support changes were made.

Upgrading to v4.2
-------------------
1. Generate a back-up of the metadata by running the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ select backup_metadata('out_path');
	  
   .. tip:: SQream recommends storing the generated back-up locally in case needed.
   
   SQream runs the Garbage Collector and creates a clean backup tarball package.
   
2. Shut down all SQream services.

    ::

3. Copy the recently created back-up file.

    ::

4. Replace your current metadata with the metadata you stored in the back-up file.

    ::

5. Navigate to the new SQream package bin folder.

    ::

6. Run the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ ./upgrade_storage <levelDB path>

  .. note:: Upgrading from a major version to another major version requires you to follow the **Upgrade Storage** step. This is described in Step 7 of the `Upgrading SQream Version <../installation_guides/installing_sqream_with_binary.html#upgrading-sqream-version>`_ procedure.
  
